Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turveyville.
Many, including those who fought in it, called the Korean War the Forgotten War.
It was certainly not forgotten by the some 1900 Aggies who served there, certainly not by the families of the 63 Aggies who died there.
Second Lieutenant Bob Middleton took the fast track from his graduation from A&M in 1951 to the front lines at Heartbreak Ridge.
That's where they did battle, mostly in the pitch dark of night, often in the snow.
Bob Middleton left Korea with many memories of survival and with the Army's Silver Star Medal.
Today, retired in College Station with his wife, Bobby Joyce, Bob Middleton is rightly proud to have served his country in combat.
Bob Middleton, thank you for joining us.
It is a pleasure to have really my first Korean War veteran on Veterans of the Valley.
It's called the Forgotten War, but you look at it as while World War II may have been the greatest generation, you said that you were their younger brothers.
Why do you think it's called the Forgotten War?
Why do you think that?
Because of its timing in history?
Well, I think it fell in between World War II and Vietnam.
And when we finished, we just went back home and went about our business.
And nobody seemed to have missed us.
In fact, one person told me when I was back after being gone two years in the Army,
If you want to know where I'd been, he hadn't seen me in two or three weeks.
I can't say why they've forgotten it, but it is forgotten.
Most of the younger generation don't even know what you're talking about.
And the older ones will remember, oh, yeah, I remember that happened back.
Yeah, I remember it was in there between World War II and Vietnam.
Let's go back early on.
You graduated from A&M in 1951, but you grew up, you hopped around the Brazos Valley.
You grew up in Tomball, born in Iola, spent some time in Navasota and Hearn.
So you've been all around the Brazos Valley in your youth, right?
Yes, besides going to Texas A&M.
As you say, I was born in Iola, Texas, which is just 25 miles from here on an old farm of my grandfather.
I started the first grade in Minnesota and went three years in Hearn and went from there to Tomball and graduated from Tomball High School and eventually from Texas A&M.
Indeed, as we said, it was a fast track from Texas A&M to the front lines in Korea.
Your class of 1951.
Right in there, classes from 49 to 51, 52, those were the folks that pretty much went straight from A&M
to Korea because that's when that war was being fought.
That's right.
I would say the class of 50 took the brunt of it because they got out just as it happened in June of 1950.
And they were picked up and sent over right then.
And most of them were involved in the charge from Pusan back up to the Yalu River and back.
And some of them were involved in the Chosen Reservoir, which was probably the worst battle that ever happened in Korea.
Now, you did get some training.
You went 16 weeks to Fort Benning.
Talk a little bit about your training and then what led you over to Korea.
When I first got my orders, I was ordered directly to Fort Benning, Georgia for a 16 week associate army officer school.
And there we learned how to be officers.
We were already officers with the teachers how to be.
And it was a good school.
We went through all the basics that you do with training of troops.
We were down doing the nitty gritty, doing the rifle of work and everything else.
But my orders had,
also assigned me to this 6th Infantry Division in Fort Ord, California.
After that 16 weeks, we went to Fort Ord, and our job there was to train new recruits, the draftees that were coming in, and we had to put them through an eight-week training program.
And then I got through one full program and partially through another, and my orders came to go to Korea,
Which you did, and you left your wife, and you left, I believe, a brand new daughter?
Yes, I did.
You went to Hobby Airport, got on a plane, and by the time you were through flying, you were from Hobby to the front lines pretty much, wasn't it?
I flew from Hobby to battalion headquarters.
And then I had to take a jeep and then on.
I guess they couldn't get me there.
But from battalion on to the front lines then, you were in direct sight of the enemy.
Once you went around a little finger behind the mountain,
You went right up what was called the Mong Dong Nee Valley.
Right.
And they could see you forever.
I mean, it was just like the, on a clear night, you can see forever.
I think somebody wrote a song or wrote a book about that or something.
Indeed.
So you were in the big show quickly.
And you were a platoon leader.
Yeah.
55 men in your platoon.
Were you a little surprised when you got there that they made you a platoon leader?
Well, not really.
That was my military occupation specialty.
1542, infantry unit commander, so that's what you expect.
Your platoon was called the International Platoon.
Not a whole lot of them spoke English, right?
That's right.
I was in the 40th Infantry Division, which was the California National Guard.
When they went over there, I think they pulled a little political pressure, but they couldn't pull
the unit off, so they just started pulling individuals.
And when they replaced them, they didn't replace them with enough troops, and so they had to borrow troops from somewhere else.
And we had a lot of patooshes, Korean attached to the United States Army.
And they, of course, they were the top of the ROC Army.
These were South Korean soldiers who were attacked.
They were South Korean soldiers out of the ROC Army.
But they couldn't speak English, but they assigned anyone that had Cassius assigned to them, they assigned an interpreter.
And I had a kid named Pox, who was 16 years old, and what they did was pick out kids that could speak, the young kids that could speak English, and they stayed there right on the front lines with the people and interpreted for them.
And he was also, his official duty was a houseboy.
which I think was confusing because he should have been an interpreter.
But he was my houseboy.
But I always had somebody that could speak Korean.
And at one time, he was replaced by a 13-year-old who could speak better English than I could.
And by the time, when I get up to 17 years old, they put them in the rock harness and send you another one.
So that was sort of a military training for them.
Right.
I want to talk a little bit about the makeup of your platoon.
There's a gentleman whose name we have not mentioned yet by the name of Ken Shockey.
And Ken was your tank platoon commander, but you knew him long before you met up with him in Korea.
Talk about that.
Well, that's right.
Ken was an Aggie.
He was a classmate of mine, and he was the commander of B Company, and I was in E Company infantry.
And I went to...
Fort Benning, well, he was about two weeks ahead, two or four weeks ahead of me, I don't know, but he was there, and I saw him quite often, and we visited back and forth.
When I went to Fort Ord, I was assigned to the 20th Infantry Regiment to Company C. And I got there, and sure enough, Ken Shockey, he was one of the platoon leaders in Company C. And I lived right across from him.
in the Ord Village.
And so we went through that, and he took off to Korea a few weeks before I did, and then I followed him to Korea.
And when I got to my company commander, my company command post, one thing he told me was to
be sure as soon as I could get over and introduce myself to the tank platoon leader, because he had five tanks attached to my platoon, and I needed to work closely with him.
And the next morning, I got up and went over to the tank platoon command post, which was about 15 yards from mine.
And sure enough, there was Ken Shockey sitting in there.
He was the tank command.
What did he say to you?
And he said something to the effect that, where have you been?
I've been waiting for you.
From Texas A&M to Korea.
And there you are.
And you meet up.
We're going to talk a little bit specifically about Heartbreak Ridge.
And I want to read something that you wrote a couple of years ago when you talked about your service.
And you were describing the ridge.
It says, down the ridge and about a third of the way across the valley ran a swift flowing shallow river.
The bank on the east side from where we were coming was straight up and about 15 feet high.
and could only be traversed by rope ladder, which was lowered by the soldier on duty at the station at the time.
And then you go on to write about the password and the countersign.
And you wrote about something very interesting on a particular date, April the 21st, about that password and the countersign.
Remember what you wrote?
Oh, yes.
The password was given to us every morning.
It came down from sold.
It changed every morning.
And you had a password and a countersign, kind of like an ID in the password you have on your computer now.
But you had to...
Guard gave you the password and you gave him the countersign and on April 21st the password was Texas and the countersign was Aggie.
So that was Mustard Day.
Well, there were Aggies everywhere in Korea.
You ran into them everywhere.
Later on we're going to talk about a former A&M Commandant that you ran into, but it was amazing.
We said at the beginning, 1900.
Aggies served in the Korean War.
So you were running into them everywhere.
I saw them practically all the time.
In one place or another, you'd run into an Aggie.
You came away from Korea with the Silver Star.
Tell us about the particular incident, more than an incident, the battle, to where you and I know that Shockey was also involved in this same battle, where you were awarded the Silver Star.
Well, we had, every night we sent out ambush patrols.
And that was just seven men or so would go out in front of the lines a few hundred yards and set up just to let you know if somebody was coming in.
And occasionally, about once a week or so, they would send out larger patrols.
which was called a combat patrol.
And different platoon leaders would take their men out and go to different areas and try to make contact with the enemy, and usually did.
And this particular night, we had three different locations we had to go out to, and our purpose was to capture
a prisoner if we could and so we went to this first area uh out in front of the lines and uh sit for about an hour and nothing happened and so we picked up and went to the second area and actually i had three different sections of my patrol i had a reserve patrol and a ready reserve patrol consisting of about seven men each and
And the reserve was to stand back until we needed it.
And the ready reserve was to just stay behind us until if we found action, they would come in and assist.
After the second location, we went on to the third location, which was rather deep.
We were sort of expecting something there.
And we went partially up a finger towards the mountain.
And we had a place that we were supposed to stay.
And before this, for three days, they had set in mortar shells and tank and howitzers would hone in to all three of these locations in case we needed them.
And so they were already zeroed in.
And sure enough, at the third location, we did make contact with the enemy.
I saw some coming down the ridge.
First, I saw about eight of them.
And while we were looking at them, we noticed a heard some noise on one of the sides.
And there were several more over there.
So anyway, we commenced the fire.
And we had quite a battle, I guess the battle lasted about 20 minutes, but we were subsequently surrounded.
So I had to have the ready reserve come break through and told the
told the reserve people to take care of the ones that were on the left.
So we didn't have to worry about them, but they engaged those.
And we had several, several people were wounded and one of my BAR men, he was shot and I saw him go down and he jumped right back up again.
I was firing and we had to go up.
One of the other guys fell.
I knew where he was.
And so I crawled up and got him and drug him back where we could kind of take care of him.
And the battle progressed and we were finally able to break through.
And the reason why we were, we had to call fire in on ourselves because that was just a situation that was at hand.
The artillery didn't want to do it.
And I noticed they were slow coming back, so I got on the radio and just got a hold of the shocker and told him to come on in.
He pinpointed and he said, well, you're there.
And I said, yes, we've got to get out.
And so he just came in and started firing right where he was supposed to.
And I guess when the artillery and the howitzer saw what was going on, they came in too.
And we had our own fire bursting all around us, but we were able to get through.
And in the end, we killed 20 for sure and probably three more.
And we were able to get two bodies back on them.
We didn't catch any alive prisoners, but we were able to get some bodies back.
But by the time we got back,
Two of the lines was a fella that I dragged back was dead.
We figured he was already dead.
but we didn't leave him there.
And that essentially is what happened.
And you were awarded the Silver Star?
I was awarded the Silver Star as was my BAR man for the same thing.
He's the one that got shot.
But he got up and he had quite a deep wound in his chest right here.
And it got him through his flak jacket when he had got
It turned and went through and got through and got part of his chest.
I want all Aggies to understand what you're saying here because Ken Shockey was your platoon tank commander.
Yes.
You still credit him and what his platoon did for saving your life.
As you wrote, that's the ultimate example of Aggies helping Aggies.
As far as I'm concerned, he saved my life as well as the other people that came in from there.
You're right here, Lieutenant Middleton.
I was on my own now, a young, small town boy, a young, small town boy, suddenly put in charge of 55 men, at least half of whom were older than me, and all hoping and praying that this kid would make the right decisions and not botch things up and get us all killed.
That was your thoughts back then.
That was my thoughts when I first got there.
And they were leery.
There was pressure on you.
Yeah, they were leery.
I was 22 years old.
I'd hate to put a group of people in charge of a 22-year-old, but that's the way it was.
But that's the way it was.
And during this battle, were you too busy to think, hey, I might get killed here?
I mean, you were busy working to protect your troop and to protect yourself.
I guess you were too busy to think about what could have happened.
It never occurred to me until I got back.
And then you realized where you had been.
But it didn't occur to me.
It doesn't occur to people.
They got a job to do.
I want to go to some photographs from a scrapbook that your wife made for you about your service in Korea.
And we're going to page through them.
Wish we could show the entire scrapbook because it's amazing what your wife did.
Talk about this picture.
Here is obviously a young Latin Texas Aggie cadet, Bob Middleton.
That's my senior picture, the official senior picture with my boots.
They make them every year.
Every year they make a picture of seniors in their boots.
Actually, I have one of my grandson.
in his boots and he has that particular picture in the background of it.
So you can actually see both of those pictures.
Panning out there and you can see there's the same senior boots that seniors wear today.
That's the one, the same boots.
They cost me $80 and now I think they're doing $900.
Inflation has hit the actual senior boots.
I paid $80 for the boots and $7 for the spurs.
This is a page in the scrapbook.
This is you and Ken Shockey?
That's me and Ken Shockey in front of my command post.
And that's where I lived, right behind there.
And that's Ken on the left, and I'm the one on the right that's got the helmet over his eyes.
And was that taken right there in the Mundung?
Yes, that's in the Mundung knee valley.
And any time you got out like that, you were subject to being shot at.
They shot rifle fire at you.
mortars, anything you take, anytime you went out there, you're getting shot at.
I want to pan out now a little bit if we can and show a picture then that was taken.
I'll lift this up so we can see it right here.
This photograph was taken, what, a couple of years ago?
Yes, it was taken about two years ago and that's, let me point out, that's Ken Shockey right there and there's me.
in the same position as we were 52 years before.
That's about 52 years after that other picture was taken.
There you are, the same folks.
That's an amazing photograph.
And those are four Aggies that were in the 40th Infantry Division in the class of 51.
Turn the page again.
This is some newspaper clippings.
about when you were awarded the Silver Star, another photograph of you, newspaper clippings.
What paper was this from?
Was this from Houston?
Oh, that top one was from the Houston Post at the time, and then some of it was from the Tombaugh paper, and I think one of them was from the Palacios paper.
We're very proud of you.
Very proud of you, indeed.
Going to fast forward through the album here.
Talk about this picture.
This was a reunion when you lived in Bay City.
Yes, I moved from Bay City about two years ago.
We lived in Matagorda County.
And the county recognized on Veterans Day all the Korean veterans.
And that's all the Korean veterans in Madagascar County that we could get together.
And some of the people that I didn't know, but we all got acquainted.
And that was just something the county did.
I'm going to slip one picture right here and in front of here as we're going to go back so people can get an idea.
This is a photo.
Will you tell us, what is this photograph?
That is a photograph of winter at Heartbreak Ridge.
If you look, I'll point out this.
This is the trenches, the front line trenches.
It goes right here and across there and across.
Actually, this went down across the valley and back up the other side.
The valley doesn't show real good in that,
The valley was right across here.
And that's the way it looked in the wintertime.
And any time we went out on patrol, we wore white covers.
They called them whites.
They were just like a sheet.
Like a camouflage for the snow.
You put the regular uniform and put that over, and then supposedly they couldn't see you.
But I have my doubts.
I think you can't hide from people like that.
Yeah.
And especially on a moonlight night, you can just see for miles on a moonlight night.
Indeed, indeed.
Your next mission in Korea, after Heartbreak Ridge, you were sent for a completely different kind of mission.
Talk a little about it.
You were sent to an island.
Yes.
We actually were replaced from the front line
for training purposes.
And after we'd been there just a little while, they had a prison uprising in Koji Doe Island.
And Colonel Boatner, who was the commandant at Texas A&M the entire time I was here, he spent his four years, and he was sent to Korea.
He was, the story goes that he was asked, they had an uprising and they caught the commandant of the prison.
The American general was captured.
And they couldn't hardly, I mean, they couldn't get him out.
And so they called Hayden Boatner in and asked him, told him they wanted him to go down there and quilt that right and could he
Did he think he could handle it?
And he said, I spent four years
working with Texas A&M Mother's Club, but I think I can handle that.
Now, whether he said that or not, I don't know, but that's it.
It sounds like a great thing to say.
Talk a little bit more about what you did on this island as far as the POWs.
There were 3,000 prisoners, mostly Chinese.
No, they were actually 45,000 prisoners.
On this island?
On this one island.
They're mostly Chinese, and some of them were North Koreans.
But the ones that wanted to stay there, they had moved over on the mainland.
But these were the bad ones over there.
And they had broken them down in 5,000 to 10,000-man compounds, which is just too big.
You can't handle 5,000 enemy at one time, even inside a barbed wire fence.
Our job was to break them down into smaller compounds.
We had to go down.
And it had already been started when we got there, but they called for additional help.
And our job was to break these prisoners into 500-man compounds and to keep them under surveillance all the time.
Right, right.
And you were able to do that?
Yes.
Talk about when you got the word that you were going to go home.
You were on an LST.
You were floating on an LST at the time.
Yeah, they were.
We had loaded on the LST, and we'd been relieved at Koji, and we was moving back, and we didn't know where we were going.
We knew we were eventually going back to the front lines.
Actually, the LST was pulling back, and the ramp was raised at about a 30-degree angle, and the Jeep pulled out in front.
I was on the top deck looking down.
And the lieutenant got out and he said, tell Lieutenant Middleton that if he can get off the ship, he can go home.
We've got his orders.
And it didn't take me long to get down.
And I ran up that ramp and jumped in the water about knee deep.
And I was able to get out though.
And as it happened,
I was put on the USS Marine links to go back home, and we were about five days out when the war ended.
So actually the people that had pulled out, I guess they didn't make it back to the front lines.
Right.
I know you said that you had hoped that going over there you'd be on a slow boat, coming back you'd be on a fast plane, but it was just the opposite, is that right?
It happened the opposite, obviously.
You went home on a slow boat.
That's the way my life goes anyway, but we make it.
You leave active duty.
You're at Fort Sam Houston.
You're in the reserves until 1964.
That's right.
And then your career, you followed in your dad's footsteps, right?
You were in the oil business as a pipe liner.
I was in the oil business, actually building and operating pipelines.
And he was with Exxon, or Hummel at the time, and he retired as a pipe liner, and I went with the
and became Mobile Oil Corporation for my career.
Right, and you did an awful lot of traveling.
You did more traveling, actually, in your post-military career than you did as a soldier.
Yes, we built power lines and operated them.
I actually worked in
Norway, and Libya, and Saudi Arabia, and Qatar.
Most of the time in the pipeline industry.
Except for Qatar, I was in production then.
That was my last assignment.
Norway was cold, but not as cold as you remember Korea being, right?
That's correct.
I've spent three years in Norway, and I never did get as cold as I got cold.
One night in Korea, it's cold in Korea.
It's also hot.
It gets hot and humid.
I'm going to give you this, Lieutenant Middleton.
I want you to hold it up sort of up there next to your shoulder and show folks.
There you go.
Hold it up high.
That is your silver star.
That's the silver star.
There you go.
Right there, just like it's pinned on your chest.
I noticed that's something that you're very, very proud of.
Yes, it is.
But there's a lot of other people that maybe didn't get one, but they deserved it.
That deserved it.
This is something I'm proud of, yes.
You certainly did deserve it.
And thank you for your service.
I wish we had more time, but thank you very much for being with us.
It's my pleasure to be here, and I appreciate what you do to the veterans.
Thank you, Lieutenant Bob Middleton.
The Korean War probably earned its nickname, the Forgotten War, by its timing in history, sandwiched between World War II and Vietnam.
But more than 33,000 Americans died in Korea.
Another 92,000 were wounded, and more than 7,000 taken prisoner.
It's certainly part of our historical landscape that should never be forgotten, nor the brave soldiers like Robert Middleton who fought there.
We salute Bob Middleton for his service and thank all veterans, and thanks to our underwriter, First National Bank.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.